# 1 Introduction

A zero-knowledge virtual machine (zkVM) is a cryptographic protocol that allows an untrusted prover to succinctly prove that it correctly ran some computer program  $\Psi$  on a witness. In a zkVM, the computer program is specified to run on a specific CPU architecture, which is also called a virtual machine (VM) or an instruction set architecture (ISA). In a zkVM proof, the prover proves that it correctly ran  $\Psi$  cycle-by-cycle.

Generally speaking, zkVMs produce short proofs and have fast verification. Even if the zkVM first produces a proof  $\pi$  that is moderately large,  $\pi$  can be generically shrunk via *SNARK composition*. This means generating a smaller proof  $\pi'$  that establishes that the prover knows a valid  $\pi$ . Accordingly, the bottleneck in zkVM performance is prover runtime. zkVM provers today remain hundreds of thousands of times slower than native execution (i.e., the amount of work done to generate a proof  $\pi$  relative to that required to simply run  $\Psi$  with no proof of correctness).

**Background on zkVMs and memory checking.** zkVM provers prove that they did two things correctly, over and over. They first prove the correct execution of the “fetch-decode-execute” logic of the VM, once per cycle. Second, they prove that reads and writes to registers and RAM were executed faithfully.

A state-of-the-art zkVM, called Jolt [AST24], turns almost everything a VM does into reads and writes to memory. This includes the “fetch-decode-execute” logic of the VM. Roughly speaking, Jolt turns “fetch and decode” into a lookup into a read-only memory storing the program bytecode. Meanwhile, executing each primitive instruction is done via a lookup into a gigantic pre-determined table of size  $2^{64}$ . Jolt accomplishes this by using Lasso [STW24], which internally turns this one lookup into a giant table into a short sequence of lookups into smaller tables, and combines the results to get the output of the instruction.

In summary, a key bottleneck for zkVM provers, and for the Jolt prover in particular, is proving that it correctly processed all reads and writes to memory. The fastest known methods for this task are called *offline memory checking* techniques. These techniques date back to work of Lipton [Lip89, Lip90] and Blum et al. [BEG $^{+}$ 91]. In the context of zkVMs, offline memory checking techniques allow a prover to commit to a constant number of values, and perform a constant number of field operations, per memory operation performed by the CPU. Jolt currently uses Spice [SAGL18] as its memory-checking argument for registers and RAM, and Lasso [STW24] for read-only memories.

**Our contributions.** We describe a new approach to memory-checking that improves significantly on offline memory checking techniques, promising substantial end-to-end speedups for zkVM provers. For reasons that will become clear, we call our approach the *method of one-hot addressing and increments*.

We instantiate this method via two different families of protocols, called **Twist** and **Shout**. **Twist** supports read/write memories, while **Shout** targets read-only memories (also known as lookup arguments).<sup>1</sup> Both families are parameterized by an integer  $d \ge 1$ . The smaller the memory, the smaller  $d$  can be, and the cheaper each memory operation is for the prover as a result.

**Twist** and **Shout** significantly improve on prior works across the full range of realistic memory sizes, from tiny memories (e.g., 32 registers as in RISC-V), to read-only memories that are so large they can’t be explicitly materialized (e.g., structured lookup tables of size  $2^{64}$  or larger, as arise in the Jolt zkVM).

Detailed cost analysis shows that **Twist** and **Shout** are over 10 $\times$  cheaper for the prover than state-of-the-art memory-checking procedures configured to have similar proof length. Prior memory-checking procedures can also be configured to have larger proofs. Even then, we estimate that **Twist** and **Shout** are (at least) 2–4 $\times$  faster for the prover.

Not only do **Twist** and **Shout** significantly speed up the prover across all practical memory sizes, they also give the prover a cost profile that more closely matches real CPUs. Unlike offline memory-checking techniques, the method of one-hot addressing is significantly faster for small memories than big ones, and **Twist** is faster for sequences of memory accesses with high locality (see Section 8.2.3 for details). This means that existing

<span id="page-3-1"></span>

<sup>1</sup>Twist is short for Tracking Write Increments via Sum-check Techniques and Shout for Sum-check-based Handling of Unchanging Tables.

compiler toolchains that optimize for program execution time on real CPUs are more likely to also lead to fast zkVM provers once memory-checking is done via **Twist** and **Shout**.

At the highest level, **Twist** and **Shout** leverage the power of the sum-check protocol [LFKN90] to minimize the amount of data the prover has to commit to, and to prove satisfaction of very large but very sparse constraint systems (i.e., a huge number of witness variables, but almost all of them are 0) while only “paying” for the sparsity of the witness (number of non-zeros) rather than the size of the witness.

**The parameter  $d$ : where it comes from and what it buys.** When applied to memories of size  $K$ , the prover in the simplest variations of **Twist** and **Shout** commits to  $K - 1$  0s and a single 1 per read or write operation. This makes these protocols especially efficient when combined with elliptic-curve-based commitment schemes, which are uniquely fast at committing to 0s: any committed 0s literally do not alter the commitment so they are free to commit, and committing to a 1 requires a single group operation requiring only 6–7 field operations. This performance profile is an excellent fit for the Jolt zkVM for RISC-V [And17], which currently achieves state-of-the-art prover performance and uses elliptic curve commitment schemes (specifically, HyperKZG [ZSC24] or Zeromorph [KT23]).

However, even when 0s are free to commit to, large memories are problematic for the simplest instantiations of our methods, primarily because the commitment key (which must be stored by the prover) gets very large.<sup>2</sup> To address this, we describe an entire family of protocols in which, for any desired integer  $d \ge 1$ , the prover only commits to roughly  $d \cdot K^{1/d}$  0s per read or write operation. Using a large value of  $d$  comes at a cost: the prover also commits to  $d$  1s per read or write operation, and each committed 1 forces the prover to perform one group operation. Hence, large values of  $d$  mean vastly fewer 0s are committed, which keeps the commitment key size bounded, but it also means slightly more 1s are committed, which modestly slows down the prover. Larger values of  $d$  also increase the amount of work the **Twist** and **Shout** provers do “outside of commitments”, and proof size grows linearly with  $d$  too. So one wants to choose  $d$  as small as possible, subject to the constraint that the commitment key is not too large.

Choosing a value  $d \ge 2$  renders our methods suitable for memory sizes  $K$  in the millions or billions. It also allows our techniques to be productively instantiated with hashing-based multilinear commitment schemes over binary fields like Binius [DP23], FRI-Binius [DP24], and Blaze [BCF<sup>+</sup>24]. Even though committing to 0s is not “free” with these schemes, committing to values that are known a priori to be in  $\{0, 1\}$  is cheap enough that our results still offer improvements over prior works.<sup>3</sup> For these commitment schemes,  $d$  should be set just large enough to ensure that commitment time is not a prover bottleneck.

Since the **Twist** and **Shout** provers commit to  $dK^{1/d}$  bits per address, to ensure committing with a hashing-based scheme is sufficiently fast,  $dK^{1/d}$  should be between a few dozen and a couple hundred bits, with larger memories leading to larger values of  $d$  (and more committed bits).

To summarize, in applications we expect  $d$  to be between 1 and 4 if using an elliptic curve commitment scheme and between 1 and 16 if using a binary-field hashing-based commitments. Larger memories necessitate larger values of  $d$ . See Section 2.8 for details.

**The high-level ideas of **Twist** and **Shout**.** A simple observation underlying **Twist** and **Shout** is that when memory addresses are specified in one-hot form, correctness of reads and writes becomes equivalent to very simple (i.e., rank-one) constraint systems. This observation is already explicit in prior works on lookup arguments [ZBK<sup>+</sup>22, ZGK<sup>+</sup>22, STW24, GM24].

These constraint systems can be directly checked for correctness via the standard sum-check-based zero-check PIOP for, say, R1CS (see Section 3.6 for details). But there is a challenge: the constraint systems are very large, so large that we cannot tolerate a prover that runs in time linear in the number of witness variables, since for  $T$  operations into a memory of size  $K$ , there are (more than)  $K \cdot T$  witness variables. Fortunately, the constraint systems are highly *sparse*: although they involve a huge number of variables, only about  $T$ 

<span id="page-4-1"></span><span id="page-4-0"></span>

<sup>2</sup>If the commitment key is structured, it must be generated via a trusted setup, which further limits its size.

<sup>3</sup>For memories consisting of just a few cells, such as the 2 registers in the Cairo Virtual Machine [GPR21, Section 2.4] and even the 32 registers in RISC-V, our protocols improve on prior work even when hashing-based commitment schemes over non-binary fields are used.

of them are non-zero. This lets us implement the sum-check prover applied to these constraint systems in roughly  $O(K + T)$  time rather than  $O(K \cdot T)$  time. Roughly speaking, the sum-check prover does not “pay” for 0-variables, and neither does the prover when committing to those variables, at least when using a curve-based commitment scheme.

On top of this, for very large but “structured” read-only memories, where  $K = T^C$  with  $C \ge 1$ , by invoking (and generalizing) the sparse-dense sum-check protocol from the Generalized-Lasso protocol [STW24], we can implement Shout’s sum-check prover in time  $O(C \cdot T) \ll O(K + T)$ .

When using parameter  $d > 1$ , Twist and Shout further exploit that every “one-hot” vector (meaning a vector in  $\{0, 1\}^K$  with exactly one entry equal to 1) can be expressed as a tensor product of  $d$  smaller one-hot vectors, each of length  $K^{1/d}$ . We use this to control the negative effects of large memory sizes  $K$ , especially the size of the commitment key when using curve-based commitment schemes and the total number of committed bits when using hashing-based commitment schemes. This does come at the cost of higher-complexity constraints in the resulting constraint systems: they change from rank-1 to rank- $d$ .

Twist needs to overcome an additional obstacle that threatens to bring in a  $\Theta(K \cdot T)$  cost to the prover’s runtime in the context of read/write memory. Specifically, a natural first attempt at designing Twist involves the prover committing to the value of *every register at every cycle*. This would be  $K \cdot T$  committed non-zero values. Twist addresses this by instead having the prover commit to *increments*: the difference in value for each register cycle-by-cycle. Since at most one register is written per cycle, this entails committing to only  $T$  rather than  $K \cdot T$  non-zero values (moreover, all  $T$  of these non-zero values are “small” and hence fast to commit to). At the end of the sum-check protocol, when the verifier needs to compute a random evaluation of (the multilinear extension of) the register values themselves, we offload that evaluation to the prover with a second invocation of the sum-check protocol that relates the register values to the increments. At the end of *that* sum-check, the verifier needs to evaluate the multilinear extension of the increments at a random point, which it can do because the increments themselves were committed.

We give two different implementations of the Twist prover. An important property of one of them is that the prover is faster when memory operations are *local*. Roughly, for a read or write operation to a memory cell that was accessed at most  $2^i$  time steps prior, the Twist prover performs only  $O(i)$  field multiplications to process that operation, less than the  $O(\log K)$  multiplications that the prover performs per memory operation in the worst case. In order to achieve this, this variant of the Twist prover binds variables in a different order than the Shout prover: the Twist prover binds “cycle-count-specification” (i.e., time) variables first, rather than “memory-address-specification” (i.e., memory) variables. This ensures that in the first  $\log K$  rounds, temporally-close accesses to the same memory cell quickly “coalesce”, which is what allows the prover to benefit from locality of memory access. In other words, by binding time variables first, the sparsity (i.e., number of non-zeros) in the vectors the prover is processing falls quickly round-over-round when memory accesses are local, and the prover’s runtime in each round grows only with the number of non-zeros in these vectors.

**Fast-prover SNARKs for non-uniform constraints.** We also use Shout to give two new, fast-prover SNARKs for non-uniform circuits or constraint systems. We call these SNARKs SpeedySpartan and Spartan++. Both offer a significant improvement in overall prover time relative to the previous state of the art, BabySpartan [ST23], and in particular a 4 $\times$  improvement in commitment costs. In SpeedySpartan and Spartan++, the prover commits to the witness (the solution to the constraint system), and nothing else.

(At least this is the case when using polynomial commitment schemes with fast evaluation proof generation, e.g., Hyrax [WTS $^{+18}$ ], Dory [Lee21]). For other schemes like HyperKZG, Zeromorph, and Bulletproofs/IPA, evaluation proofs themselves require committing to a linear amount of data.)

SpeedySpartan is concretely faster than Spartan++, due primarily to SpeedySpartan’s use of a lookup table that is quadratically smaller than the one used by Spartan++. Hence, we consider SpeedySpartan to be of practical interest and Spartan++ to be primarily of conceptual interest (although even Spartan++ is concretely almost an order of magnitude faster than Spartan itself [Set20]). Spartan++’s most interesting performance property is that its prover’s commitment costs grow linearly with the number of multiplication gates in the circuit and not the total gate count (i.e., addition gates do not contribute to commitment costs). But both SpeedySpartan

and **Spartan++** reduce commitment costs so much that they are not a prover bottleneck, and hence this property of **Spartan++** does not translate to major improvements in concrete costs.

**The high-level ideas of SpeedySpartan and Spartan++.** SpeedySpartan and Spartan++ observe that correct processing of circuit wires boils down to lookups. By circuit wires here, we mean which gate outputs need to be treated as inputs to which other gates.

There are two different ways this reduction from wires to lookups can be done. One technique originates in Spartan and its use of the Spark sparse polynomial commitment scheme [Set20]. The other originates in BabySpartan [ST23]. SpeedySpartan is a major refinement of the BabySpartan approach, while Spartan++ is a major improvement of the Spartan/Spark approach.

In the case of SpeedySpartan, BabySpartan already showed that each input to any gate can be computed with a lookup into the table that stores all gate outputs. BabySpartan invokes Lasso as the lookup argument. SpeedySpartan replaces Lasso with Shout. We further observe that this replacement allows certain polynomials that were explicitly committed by the BabySpartan prover to instead be *virtual*: they are *not* committed by the prover, and Shout nonetheless allows the verifier to evaluate these polynomials at the necessary evaluation point. This leads to a  $4\times$  reduction in commitment costs, with field work improvements coming from the improved efficiency of Shout relative to Lasso.

In the case of Spartan++, we directly give a major improvement of the Spark sparse polynomial commitment scheme. In its evaluation proofs, Spark has the prover prove it correctly ran a fast algorithm for evaluating the committed sparse polynomial at the requested evaluation point (see [STW24, Section 3.1] for details of this view of Spark). This algorithm performs lookups into a large table that stores evaluations of multilinear Lagrange basis polynomials at the requested (random) evaluation point. Spark effectively applies the Lasso lookup argument to this table. This requires the prover to commit to two random values per non-zero coefficient of the sparse polynomial (these random values are the results of lookups into “subtables” decomposing the large table). We replace Lasso with Shout, and further observe that this allows for the values returned by the lookups to be virtual polynomials. This eliminates the major prover bottleneck in Spark.

To summarize, SpeedySpartan and Spartan++ use lookups in very different ways to deal with circuit wires. For circuits with  $n$  gates, SpeedySpartan computes a gate's inputs via lookups into the size- $n$  table storing all gate outputs. Spartan++ performs lookups into a size- $n^2$  table storing all evaluations of multilinear Lagrange basis polynomials at a random evaluation point. Spartan++ pays increased costs relative to SpeedySpartan because the lookup table it uses is quadratically bigger, its use of the larger table does enable its commitment costs to grow linearly only with the number of multiplication gates.

<span id="page-6-0"></span>
