## A Overview of offline memory-checking protocols

**Read/write memories.** For read/write memories, there are two high-level approaches. In the first approach, which we refer to as *reordering-based approach*, the prover commits to a *re-ordering* of the memory operations (both reads and writes) such that they are grouped by which memory cell is accessed, and ordered by timestep (i.e., cycle) within each group. Confirming that this “second” committed vector of memory operations is indeed a reordering of the first amounts to a permutation check. It must be proved that within each group the memory operations are indeed ordered by timestep. Given this ordering, it is then relatively straightforward to prove that each write to that cell returns the value most recently written to that cell. This approach was first implemented in [BSCG<sup>+</sup>13, WSR<sup>+</sup>15], but dates back to the much older work [Rob91, BCGT13]. For proving a permutation check, these old works employ a permutation network (a technique originally motivated by non-interactivity requirements of the PCP model). The approach was refined in vRAM [ZGK<sup>+</sup>18] with the use of interaction to use fingerprinting techniques [Lip89, Lip90] (see

Section 2.3) rather than a permutation network. See also a recent work by Ozdemir et al. [OLB24] that uses the reordering-based approach.

The second approach, which we refer to as “reordering-free approach”, was first implemented and made practical by Spice [SAGL18], building on the older work of Blum et al. [BEG+91]. Spartan [Set20] refined this approach to use fingerprinting-based multiset equality check, and employed it for proving sparse polynomial evaluations. This approach is further refined in Jolt [AST24], to use lookup arguments for establishing timestamp checks in the memory checking algorithm. Recently, Yang and Heath [YH23] describe an approach that is essentially the same as Spice’s for proving memory operations.

In this approach, the prover does not reorder the memory operations, but commits to some extra data for each read and write to memory. Specifically, each cell is augmented to store not only a value but a timestamp, which is returned with each read and updated with each write. Also, each read to memory is followed by a “dummy write” operation that writes the returned value back to the same cell with the timestamp updated. Similarly, each write operation is preceded by a “dummy read” operation to that cell. The point of having the prover commit to this extra data (timestamps, dummy reads, and dummy writes) is that it ensures the set of “read tuples” (i.e., address, value, timestamp triples) returned by all read operations is a permutation of the set of all “write tuples” if and only if the value returned by every read operation is indeed the value most recently written to that cell.

At least as implemented in Jolt, the way that timestamps are computed on write operations in Spice necessitates range-checking two values. Specifically, Spice maintains a *global timestamp*  $gt$ . At the end of cycle  $i$ ,  $gt$  is set to  $i$ . Here, we use the term cycle to refer to one read operation followed by one write operation, where one of the two operations is a “dummy” operation as described above.

In Spice, when a read operation returns a value along with timestamp  $t$ , the associated write operation (if the prover is honest) uses timestamp  $t' = \max\{t + 1, gt + 1\}$ . Intuitively, the point of using this timestamp update procedure is to prevent “time travel attacks”, where a cheating prover returns on an early read a value that will only be written in the future to that cell, and returns on a later read a value that was written in the distant past to that cell. The timestamp update procedure in Spice forces the timestamps to increase monotonically as the cycles proceed, preventing this attack.

If the prover is honest, the timestamp  $t$  returned by a read operation at cycle  $i$  is always less than or equal to  $gt = i - 1$ , and under this guarantee, the prescribed write timestamp  $t'$  simply equals  $gt + 1$ . To ensure that  $t$  is indeed less than or equal to  $gt$ , Jolt confirms that both  $t$  itself and  $gt - t$  are in the range  $\{0, \dots, T - 1\}$ , where  $T$  is (an upper bound on) the total number of cycles that the zkVM is run for.

These “read-timestamp range checks” are implemented in Jolt by applying the Lasso lookup argument [STW24] to the table  $\{0, \dots, T - 1\}$ . In this application of Lasso, the prover commits to two small values per lookup, and hence four small values total. These four values also contribute one factor each (so four factors in total) to a grand product that must be proved within the invocation of Lasso.

**Read-only memories and lookup arguments.** Lookup arguments refer to protocols that allow a prover to prove that every value in one vector  $v$  is present in some position in another vector called a lookup table  $t$ . The verifier in this protocol holds commitments to both  $v$  and  $t$  (or, in many cases,  $t$  is sufficiently structured that no commitment to it is needed).

While lookup arguments as typically formulated do not care about the position of the entries in the lookup table, Lasso [STW24] introduced a generalization of lookup arguments, called *indexed lookups*, where there is an additional committed vector  $a$ , and the prover must prove that  $\forall i \in [v], v[i] = t[a[i]]$ . For ease of reference, we refer to traditional lookup arguments as unindexed lookup arguments. Note that indexed lookup arguments trivially provide unindexed lookup arguments by having the prover provide a commitment to the vector  $a$  as its first message. There are also transformations from unindexed lookup arguments to indexed lookup arguments (see [STW24] for details). Indexed lookup arguments are equivalent to memory-checking arguments for read-only memory.

There are many lookup arguments in the literature [BCG+18, GW20b, ZBK+22, PK22, ZGK+22, EFG22, Hab22, STW24, PH23], and they all rely on fingerprinting techniques described in Section 2.3 to prove that

the lookup relation holds. We now provide details on some of these works.

Among these, Lasso [STW24] directly builds on the reordering-free read-write memory approach, specifically it generalizes the approach in Spartan [Set20], which itself was specialized from the read/write memories in Spice [SAGL18]. Since the values are only read and never written, some simplifications are possible compared to the read/write setting solved in Spice: there is no need to perform range checks on timestamps, they can be simply incremented by 1.

The first explicit (unindexed) lookup argument was given in Arya [BCG $^{+}$ 18]. In Arya, the prover commits to the binary representation of address *multiplicities*, i.e., the number of times each address is read. The prover then proves that looked-up values are a permutation of the vector in which each table element is repeated a number of times equal to its (committed) multiplicity. The approach in Plookup [GW20b] can be viewed as similar to the reordering-based read-write memory in vRAM, with some simplifications arising from the unindexed lookup argument setting. In particular, in Plookup, the prover commits to a sorting of the table entries and looked-up values. The approach in LogUp [Hab22] is similar to plookup [GW20b] except that it changes the fingerprinting strategy: while plookup uses a grand product, LogUp uses a grand sum of inverses.

A key insight of Lasso [STW24] is that the use of sum-check-based layered grand product arguments [Tha13] avoids the need to commit to random field elements, resulting in large prover speedups. Inspired by this, LogUpGKR [PH23] employs a sum-check-based layered grand sum argument to improve the prover efficiency of LogUp. LogUpGKR can also be viewed as a refinement of the original lookup argument, Arya, in that the LogUpGKR prover commits only to the multiplicities of each address (unlike Arya, in LogUpGKR, these multiplicities are each specified via a single field element rather than via its binary representation).

Separately, a line of work starting with Caulk and culminating in cq [ZBK $^{+}$ 22, PK22, ZGK $^{+}$ 22, EFG22], seeks lookup arguments in which an expensive pre-processing phase is performed (requiring, e.g., a number of scalar multiplications that is quasilinear in table size) after which  $m$  lookups can be answered in time that depends only on  $m$  and not on table size. However, these solutions are concretely expensive (e.g., cq requires the prover to commit to seven random field elements per lookup).
