## 2 Technical overview

We recall HyperNova and the challenges of moving to lattice-based commitments (§2.1), then present the Neo (§2.2) and SuperNeo (§2.3) embeddings, and finally our interactive reductions framework (§2.4).

### 2.1 Breaking down HyperNova

HyperNova [55] *reduces* CCS claims into random evaluation claims. These claims are instances in a *CCS relation*,  $\text{CCS}$ , and a *CCS evaluation relation*,  $\text{CE}$ .

$$\begin{aligned} \text{CCS} &:= \left\{ (\mathbf{s}; (c, x); w) : \begin{array}{l} \text{For } z := [x, w], c = \text{Commit}(z) \\ \wedge f(\overline{M_1 z}, \dots, \overline{M_t z}) \text{ vanishes on } \{0, 1\}^{\log m} \end{array} \right\} \\ \text{CE} &:= \left\{ (\mathbf{s}; (c, x, r, \{y_j\}_{j \in [t]}); w) : \begin{array}{l} \text{For } z := [x, w], c = \text{Commit}(z) \\ \wedge \forall j \in [t], y_j = \overline{M_j z}(r) \end{array} \right\} \end{aligned}$$

To be considered a folding scheme, we must be able to describe HyperNova as an interactive reduction  $\Pi : \text{CCS} \times \text{CE} \to \text{CE}$ , which takes as input a CCS relation claim and a CCS evaluation relation claim and outputs a single CCS evaluation relation claim.<sup>6</sup> Unlike the original HyperNova paper (for reasons that will become clear later), we decide to break up HyperNova into two interactive reductions which will be composed to form the overall reduction:

$$(\text{Informal}) \quad \Pi_{\text{CCS}} : \text{CCS} \times \text{CE} \to \text{CE}^2 \quad \text{and} \quad \Pi_{\text{RLC}} : \text{CE}^2 \to \text{CE}.$$

The first reduction  $\Pi_{\text{CCS}}$  utilizes the sum-check protocol [62, 78] to reduce a CCS claim and a CCS evaluation claim over a point  $r'$  into a pair of CCS evaluation claims over the same point  $r$ .

$$\begin{aligned} &(\mathbf{s}; (c, x); w) \in \text{CCS} \quad \wedge \quad (\mathbf{s}; (c', x', r'; \{y'_j\}_{j \in [t]}); w') \in \text{CE} \\ &\quad \downarrow \Pi_{\text{CCS}} \\ &(\mathbf{s}; (c, x, r, \{y_j\}_{j \in [t]}); w) \in \text{CE} \quad \wedge \quad (\mathbf{s}; (c', x', r, \{y'_j\}_{j \in [t]}); w') \in \text{CE} \end{aligned}$$

The second reduction  $\Pi_{\text{RLC}}$  combines two CCS evaluation claims over the same point  $r$  into a single CCS evaluation claim over point  $r$ . In particular, the reduction  $\Pi_{\text{RLC}}$  is trivial if  $\text{Commit} : \mathbb{F}^n \to \mathbb{G}$  is itself a linear map from field vectors to a group  $\mathbb{G}$  (i.e. linearly homomorphic). To combine both of these claims, the verifier just samples a random challenge  $\delta \in \mathbb{F}$  and checks the following combined claim:  $(\mathbf{s}; (c^*, x^*, r, \{y_j^*\}_{j \in [t]}); w^*) \in \text{CE}$ , where

$$c^* := c + \delta c', \quad x^* := x + \delta x', \quad \forall j \in [t], y_j^* := y_j + \delta y'_j, \quad w^* := w + \delta w'.$$

Because  $\text{Commit}$  is a linear map over field vectors, we have that the new commitment  $c^* = \text{Commit}(z^*)$  for  $z^* := [x^*, w^*]$ . Similarly, for each  $j \in [t]$ , we have that

<sup>6</sup> In the technical overview, we consider only folding single instances of each relation for simplicity, but our actual protocol works for folding multiple instances at once.

$z \mapsto \widetilde{M_j z}(r)$  is also a linear map over field vectors, so  $y_j^* = \widetilde{M_j z^*}(r)$ . Thus, the combined claim is indeed a valid CCS evaluation claim as desired.

In order to construct the Neo and SuperNeo folding scheme, we will need to construct a commitment scheme for field vectors (using Ajtai commitments) that has a similar *evaluation homomorphism* property, which allows us to combine CCS evaluation claims by taking random linear combinations over the ring rather than the field. In doing so, we have the essential components to adapt the HyperNova folding scheme to the lattice setting. In addition, we will have to add norm-checks into the sum-check protocol and add a decomposition reduction [12, 15, 71] to reduce norm growth. Later, we also discuss the technical difficulties when trying to use prior extraction techniques to prove the security of our reductions in the lattice setting, which is not apparent in the original HyperNova setting.

### 2.2 The Neo embedding

The Neo embedding is incredibly simple to describe, and what's surprising is that it also preserves both norm and the required form of evaluation homomorphism. To embed field vectors  $z^{(1)}, \dots, z^{(d)} \in \mathbb{F}^n$  into a ring vector  $\mathbf{z} \in R_{\mathbb{F}}$ , the Neo embedding simply embeds the field vectors along the  $d$  coefficient slots.

$$\mathbf{z} = \sum_{j=1}^{d} z^{(j)} \cdot X^{j-1} \iff \forall i \in [n], z_i = \sum_{j=1}^{d} z_i^{(j)} \cdot X^{j-1}$$

In the expression above,  $z^{(j)} \cdot X^{j-1}$  denotes scaling the field vector  $z^{(j)}$  by the monomial  $X^{j-1}$  (i.e. every element in the scaled vector has the form  $c \cdot X^{j-1}$  for some constant  $c \in \mathbb{F}$ ).

**Preserving evaluation homomorphism** The first observation is any collection of elements in the field  $\mathbb{F}$  can be naturally embedded into the ring  $R_{\mathbb{F}} \subseteq R_{\mathbb{K}}$  by interpreting them as constant polynomials. The second observation is that  $\mathbb{K}$  also contains an (isomorphic) copy of the base field  $\mathbb{F}$ . Thus, a polynomial with coefficients in the base field  $\mathbb{F}$  can also be interpreted as a polynomial with coefficients in the larger field  $\mathbb{K}$ . Thus, CCS matrices  $M_j \in \mathbb{F}^{m \times n}$  and the evaluation point  $r \in \mathbb{K}^{\log m}$  can both be trivially embedded into the ring as matrices  $M_j \in R_{\mathbb{K}}^{m \times n}$  and a point  $r \in R_{\mathbb{K}}^{\log m}$ . What happens when we take the multilinear extension of  $\mathbf{z}$  and evaluate it at this point  $r$  over the ring? The first observation is multilinear evaluation is equivalent to taking an inner product  $\widetilde{\mathbf{z}}(r) = \langle \mathbf{z}, \hat{r} \rangle$ , where  $\hat{r} \in \mathbb{K}^n$  is a field vector derived from  $r$ . The second observation is that multiplying a ring element  $a(X) = \sum_{i=0}^{d-1} a_i X^i \in R_{\mathbb{F}}$  by a constant polynomial  $c \in \mathbb{K}$  simply scales each coefficient by  $c$  (i.e.  $a(X) \cdot c = \sum_{i=0}^{d-1} (a_i \cdot c) X^i \in R_{\mathbb{K}}$ ). Combining these two observations, we can see that evaluating the multilinear extension of  $\mathbf{z}$  at the point  $r$  is equivalent to evaluating each of the underlying field vectors  $z^{(1)}, \dots, z^{(d)}$  at the point  $r$  and stacking the results as coefficients in a ring element.

$$\widetilde{\mathbf{z}}(r) = \langle \mathbf{z}, \hat{r} \rangle = \left\langle \sum_{j=1}^{d} z^{(j)} \cdot X^{j-1}, \hat{r} \right\rangle = \sum_{j=1}^{d} \langle z^{(j)}, \hat{r} \rangle \cdot X^{j-1} = \sum_{j=1}^{d} \widetilde{z^{(j)}}(r) \cdot X^{j-1}$$

Moreover, this property extends to matrix-vector multiplications as well. For  $r \in \mathbb{F}^{\log m}$ , the evaluation  $\overline{M_j z}(r)$  has coefficients that are exactly the evaluations  $\overline{M_j z^{(1)}}(r), \dots, \overline{M_j z^{(d)}}(r)$ .

We can now see that the evaluation homomorphism trivially holds for the Neo embedding. Consider two ring vectors  $\mathbf{z}, \mathbf{z}' \in \mathbb{R}_{\mathbb{F}}^n$  that are Neo embeddings of field vectors  $z^{(1)}, \dots, z^{(d)} \in \mathbb{F}^n$  and  $z'^{(1)}, \dots, z'^{(d)} \in \mathbb{F}^n$  respectively. Also, consider their evaluations  $\mathbf{y} = \overline{M_j \mathbf{z}}(r) \in \mathbb{R}_{\mathbb{K}}$  and  $\mathbf{y}' = \overline{M_j \mathbf{z}'}(r) \in \mathbb{R}_{\mathbb{K}}$  at some point  $r \in \mathbb{K}^{\log m}$ . For an arbitrary ring scalar  $\delta \in \mathbb{R}_{\mathbb{F}}$ , define  $\mathbf{z}^* = \mathbf{z} + \delta \cdot \mathbf{z}' \in \mathbb{R}_{\mathbb{F}}$  ( $c^* = c + \delta \cdot c'$ ) and  $\mathbf{y}^* = \mathbf{y} + \delta \cdot \mathbf{y}'$ . We must have that the underlying field vectors of  $\mathbf{z}^*$  evaluate to the coefficients of  $\mathbf{y}^*$  at the point  $r$ . This is because multilinear evaluation  $\mathbf{z} \mapsto \overline{M_j \mathbf{z}}(r)$  is linear over the ring so  $\mathbf{y}^* = \overline{M_j \mathbf{z}^*}(r)$ , and we just showed that the coefficients of  $\overline{M_j \mathbf{z}^*}(r)$  are exactly the evaluations of the underlying field vectors of  $\mathbf{z}^*$  at the point  $r$ . Also, the vector  $\mathbf{z}^*$  still belongs to the smaller ring  $\mathbb{R}_{\mathbb{F}}$  and the underlying field vectors of  $\mathbf{z}^*$  still belong to the base field  $\mathbb{F}$ . Thus, as long as the norm of  $\mathbf{z}^*$  is small enough (which happens if we sample  $\delta$  from a special-set),  $c^*$  is a valid commitment to  $\mathbf{z}^*$  directly using the Ajtai commitment scheme.

### 2.3 The SuperNeo embedding

**The SuperNeo embedding** Given a field vector  $z \in \mathbb{F}^{d \cdot n}$ , split the vector into  $n$  sub-vectors of length  $d$  each, i.e.,  $z = [z_1, z_2, \dots, z_n]$  where each  $z_i := [z_{i,1}, \dots, z_{i,d}] \in \mathbb{F}^d$ . We will embed each sub-vector  $z_i$  as the coefficients of a single ring element  $\mathbf{z}_i := \sum_{j=1}^d z_{i,j} X^{j-1} \in \mathbb{R}_{\mathbb{F}}$ . The resulting vector  $\mathbf{z} := [\mathbf{z}_1, \mathbf{z}_2, \dots, \mathbf{z}_n] \in \mathbb{R}_{\mathbb{F}}^n$  is the SuperNeo embedding of  $z$ .

**Evaluation Homomorphism** For cyclotomic rings, there exists a linear transformation  $\overline{\cdot} : \mathbb{F}^d \to \mathbb{F}^d$  such that for all  $a, b \in \mathbb{F}^d$ , we have the constant term  $\text{ct}(\overline{\mathbf{a}} \cdot \overline{\mathbf{b}}) = \langle a, b \rangle$  where we embed  $\overline{\mathbf{a}} \in \mathbb{F}^d$  into a ring element  $\overline{\mathbf{a}} \in \mathbb{R}_{\mathbb{F}}$  via coefficients. In layman's terms, a product over the ring simulates an inner product over the field. We can extend this transformation to vectors  $m \in \mathbb{F}^{dn}$  by applying  $\overline{\cdot}$  to each sub-vector of length  $d$ . Now, the constant term of the ring inner product  $\text{ct}(\langle \overline{\mathbf{m}}, \overline{\mathbf{z}} \rangle) = \langle m, z \rangle$ . Finally, we can extend this transformation to matrices  $M_j \in \mathbb{F}^{m \times dn}$  by applying  $\overline{\cdot}$  to each row of length  $dn$ . Thus, the constant term coefficient vector  $\text{ct}(\overline{M_j \mathbf{z}}) = M_j z$ , where we extract the constant terms of each of the  $m$  ring elements in  $\overline{M_j \mathbf{z}} \in \mathbb{R}_{\mathbb{F}}^m$ . Given a point  $r \in \mathbb{K}^{\log m}$ , we can evaluate the ring vector  $\mathbf{y} = \overline{M_j \mathbf{z}}(r)$ . As argued before, evaluating at the point  $r$  evaluates each of the underlying coefficient vectors of  $\overline{M_j \mathbf{z}}$  in parallel. Hence, the constant coefficient of the ring evaluation  $\mathbf{y}$  is exactly the desired field evaluation  $y = \overline{M_j z}(r)$ .

Moreover, since  $z \mapsto \overline{M_j \mathbf{z}}(r)$  is a linear map over  $\mathbb{R}_{\mathbb{K}}$  (similar to the case in Neo), the evaluation homomorphism property will identically be preserved. In particular, given field vectors  $z, z' \in \mathbb{F}^{dn}$  with embeddings  $\mathbf{z}, \mathbf{z}' \in \mathbb{R}_{\mathbb{F}}^n$  and evaluations  $\mathbf{y} = \overline{M_j \mathbf{z}}(r)$  and  $\mathbf{y}' = \overline{M_j \mathbf{z}'}(r)$ . For an arbitrary scalar  $\delta \in \mathbb{R}_{\mathbb{F}}$ , let  $\mathbf{z}^* = \mathbf{z} + \delta \mathbf{z}'$  and  $\mathbf{y}^* = \mathbf{y} + \delta \mathbf{y}'$ . Then, we will have that the constant coefficient

of  $\mathbf{y}^*$  is exactly the field evaluation  $\widehat{M_j z^*}(r)$  for  $z^*$  being the underlying field vector of  $\mathbf{z}^*$ .

**Pay-per-bit costs** Neo and SuperNeo are both norm preserving embeddings. Computing the Ajtai commitment  $c \leftarrow Az$  requires a ring matrix-vector product. When both the degree  $d \le 64$  and field size  $|\mathbb{F}| \le 64$  are small, a ring operation  $a \cdot b \in \mathbb{R}_{\mathbb{F}}$  is most efficiently implemented (using AVX-512) with a rotation matrix product  $\text{cf}(a \cdot b) = \text{rot}(a) \cdot \text{cf}(b) = \sum_{i=1}^d b_i \cdot \text{rot}(a)_i$  over the field  $\mathbb{F}$ . The dominating costs are scaling  $b_i \cdot \text{rot}(a)_i$ , which scales linearly with the norm of  $b_i$ . When the  $b_i$ 's are small (such as bits), the cost to compute the ring operation is essentially adding the rotations  $\text{rot}(a)_i$  for which  $b_i$  is non-zero. For security reasons [15], the cyclotomic ring cannot be perfectly splitting (ie.  $\mathbb{R} \not\cong \mathbb{F}^d$ ), so using the NTT transform is a more inefficient method to compute ring operations than simply adding scaled rotations. In particular, the NTT transform (in the non-full splitting setting) is more memory intensive, is less cache friendly, and computing high degree extension field multiplications (ex. 16  $\mathbb{F}_{q^4}$  muls) is concretely more expensive than computing the corresponding base field scaling and additions.

### 2.4 Proving the security with interactive reductions

To understand why interactive reductions are necessary, we first need to understand why the original proof of security for the HyperNova folding scheme [58] does not carry over to SuperNeo. In particular, when we move to using lattice-based commitments (such as Ajtai commitments), we will have to extract candidate openings  $z$  that not only satisfy the linear relationship  $c = Az$ , but are also sufficiently low norm (as Ajtai commitments are only binding for low norm openings). However, in the process of solving for these candidate openings, the extractor will end up obtaining vectors that potentially may have arbitrary norm. This is often the case with lattice-based proof systems, which often must combine some information-theoretic sound method to check the norm of committed vectors (such as random projections or sum-check) with a method to batch prove knowledge of linear openings (special-sound protocols). Recall (unlike in the original work) that we broke the HyperNova folding scheme down into two reductions:  $\Pi_{\text{CCS}} : \text{CCS} \times \text{CE} \to \text{CE}^2$  and  $\Pi_{\text{RLC}} : \text{CE}^2 \to \text{CE}$ . The first reduction  $\Pi_{\text{CCS}}$  reduced the CCS and CCS evaluation claim into two CCS evaluations claims by using the sum-check protocol and the second reduction  $\Pi_{\text{RLC}}$  combined the two CCS evaluation claims into a single CCS evaluation claim by taking a random linear combination. The first issue arises when we try to prove  $\Pi_{\text{RLC}}$  is knowledge sound in the lattice setting. If we follow the same extraction strategy in HyperNova, we would produce two candidate commitment openings  $z_1$  and  $z'_1$  by solving the linear system  $z_1^* = z_1 + \delta_1 z'_1$  and  $z_2^* = z_1 + \delta_2 z'_1$  for two different random challenges  $\delta_1$  and  $\delta_2$ . In particular, this will require scaling by the inverse of the difference of the two challenges  $(\delta_1 - \delta_2)^{-1}$ . However, in the ring setting, even if  $\delta_1$  and  $\delta_2$  are low norm, the inverse  $\Delta := (\delta_1 - \delta_2)^{-1}$  may have arbitrarily high norm, which would lead to candidate openings  $z_1$  and  $z'_1$  that also have arbitrarily high norm. Thus, we cannot guarantee that the extracted openings are valid openings for the commitments, but that they do indeed satisfy the linear relations  $c = Az$  and

$z \mapsto \widehat{Mz}(r)$ . This means that  $\Pi_{\text{RLC}}$  is not knowledge sound for the input relation, but instead a relaxed relation where we drop the low norm requirement on the openings. However, there is something special about these candidate openings. In particular, in the process of extracting these openings, we produced what are referred to as **relaxed** openings  $\Delta \cdot c = Az$  for the original commitments where  $z$  is low norm and  $\Delta$  belongs to the difference set  $\mathcal{C} - \mathcal{C}$ . Under the hardness of MSIS, producing multiple relaxed openings for the same commitment is hard. Thus, even if we run the extractor multiple times, it will ultimately only be able to output a single pair of candidate openings  $(z_1, z'_1)$ ; otherwise, it would be able to produce multiple relaxed openings for the same commitment. In summary, while  $\Pi_{\text{RLC}}$  by itself is not knowledge sound for the original relation, we can construct an extractor which extracts candidate witnesses for a relaxed relation, and is restricted to only being able to output a unique candidate witness (with high probability). Informally, we call an interactive reduction that satisfies these properties as a **weak interactive reduction**.

The second issue arises when we try to prove that  $\Pi_{\text{CCS}}$  is knowledge sound. In a folklore security argument (for sum-check protocols), the extractor for  $\Pi_{\text{CCS}}$  essentially rewinds the potentially malicious prover multiple times to obtain multiple candidate openings (the output witnesses) for the same commitment. These candidate openings must also satisfy the evaluations outputted by the sum-check protocol (assuming the prover is successful in both executions). However, since the commitment is binding, all these candidate openings must be the same. Hence, we are able to argue that the candidate opening (witness) from the first execution must have evaluated to the correct evaluations required by the sum-check protocol in the second execution. Observe, however, that the second execution used verifier challenges that were independent of the first execution. Hence, with high probability, the extracted candidate opening must satisfy the required CCS claims. This argument crucially relies on that the fact that the commitment scheme is binding to the candidate openings outputted by the prover. This is trivial in the original HyperNova setting since the commitments are binding to the whole message space. However, in the lattice setting, the commitments are only binding to low norm openings.

To see where this goes wrong, consider that we need to prove that the overall composition  $\Pi := \Pi_{\text{RLC}} \circ \Pi_{\text{CCS}}$  is knowledge sound.  $\Pi_{\text{RLC}}$  is only a weak interactive reduction. Hence, it can only extract candidate openings for a relaxed relation, where the low norm requirement is dropped, but all linear relations are still satisfied. Thus, these candidate openings may not be bound by the original input commitments. However, in the case of *weak* interactive reductions, we know that the extractor can only output a unique candidate opening (with high probability). Hence, we do not need to rely on the binding property of the commitment scheme to argue that all candidate openings extracted from multiple executions of the protocol must be the same. Therefore, by the same logic above, the candidate openings must satisfy the required CCS claims with high probability. Additionally, if we include sum-check constraints which ensure that the extracted openings are low norm, then we can ensure that the extracted openings are indeed valid

openings for the original commitments. Generally, what do we require from the first interactive reduction  $\Pi_{\text{CCS}}$  to ensure that the overall composition is knowledge sound? Essentially, if the malicious prover must always output the same output *relaxed* witness (with high probability), then there exist an extractor which can extract a valid witness for the original relation. We call an interactive reduction that satisfies this property a **strong interactive reduction**.

In our work, we use this framework to prove the security of our SuperNeo folding scheme  $\Pi_{\text{SuperNeo}} := \Pi_{\text{DEC}} \circ \Pi_{\text{RLC}} \circ \Pi_{\text{CCS}}$  by decomposing it into a strong interactive reduction  $\Pi_{\text{CCS}}$ , a weak interactive reduction  $\Pi_{\text{RLC}}$ , and a final reduction of knowledge  $\Pi_{\text{DEC}}$  [12, 15, 71].

**Lemma 1.** *The sequential composition  $\Pi_{\text{RLC}} \circ \Pi_{\text{CCS}}$  is a **reduction of knowledge** (Definition 5) from  $\text{CCS}(b, \mathcal{L})^K \times \text{CE}(b, \mathcal{L})^k$  to  $\text{CE}(B, \mathcal{L})$ .*

*Proof.* Follows directly from  $\Pi_{\text{CCS}}$  being a strong interactive reduction (Lemma 3),  $\Pi_{\text{RLC}}$  being a weak interactive reduction (Lemma 4), and the strong-weak composition theorem (Theorem 6).  $\square$

**Theorem 1.** *The sequential composition  $\Pi_{\text{DEC}} \circ \Pi_{\text{RLC}} \circ \Pi_{\text{CCS}}$  is a **reduction of knowledge** (Definition 5) from  $\text{CCS}(b, \mathcal{L})^K \times \text{CE}(b, \mathcal{L})^k$  to  $\text{CE}(b, \mathcal{L})^k$ .*

*Proof.* Follows directly from  $\Pi_{\text{RLC}} \circ \Pi_{\text{CCS}}$  being a reduction of knowledge (Lemma 1),  $\Pi_{\text{DEC}}$  being a reduction of knowledge (Theorem 7), and sequential composition of reductions of knowledge being reductions of knowledge (Lemma 2).  $\square$

