## 3 Overview of the following sections

Since the SuperNeo embedding lends itself to a more efficient and natural description of our folding scheme (since it does not require a SIMD constraint system), the rest of the paper will be focused on the adaption of Hypernova-like interactive reductions with the SuperNeo embedding (of course, with the appropriate lifting and analysis in the lattice setting). We defer the original Neo work to the current eprint [70].

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 4, we provide the necessary preliminaries for our work, including the syntax and security definitions for interactive reductions. In Section 5, we define the evaluation homomorphism embedding, which is a key technical tool used in our SuperNeo folding scheme. In Section 6, we give the formal definitions of strong and weak interactive reductions, and provide the exact composition theorem needed. In Section 7.1, we define the CCS relation and the CCS evaluation relation, which are the main relations used in our folding scheme. In Section 7.3, we describe the strong interactive reduction  $\Pi_{\text{CCS}}$  that reduces the CCS and CCS evaluation claims into CCS evaluation claims. In Section 7.4, we describe the weak interactive reduction  $\Pi_{\text{RLC}}$  that combines multiple CCS evaluation claims into a single CCS evaluation claim. In Section 7.5, we describe the final reduction of knowledge  $\Pi_{\text{DEC}}$  that reduces the norm of the evaluation claims from  $B = b^k$  to  $b$ .

