## 7 Putting It all Together: a SNARK for RISC-V Emulation

The overall architecture of Jolt is depicted in Figure 2. The prover begins by cryptographically committing to the execution trace  $z$  of the VM on the appropriate input (or more precisely, its multilinear extension polynomial  $\tilde{z}$ , using any multilinear polynomial commitment scheme).

**The R1CS instance and the cost of proving its satisfaction.** It is straightforward to identify R1CS constraint matrices  $A, B, C$  (see Definition 2.7) such that  $z$  is a valid execution trace if and only if  $z$  satisfies  $Az \circ Bz = Cz$  assuming  $z$  satisfies memory-consistency and relevant entries of  $z$  are indeed in the relevant lookup tables capturing evaluation of the RISC-V instructions. The constraint system is sketched in Appendix A.3. A preliminary implementation of the constraint system in Zokrates [ET18] requires about 250 lines of code. We apply Spartan to establish that  $z$  satisfies the constraint system.

The R1CS constraint matrices  $A, B, C$  are uniform, in the sense that the multilinear extensions  $\tilde{A}, \tilde{B}$ , and  $\tilde{C}$  can each be evaluated in  $O(\log T)$  field operations, where  $T$  is the number of steps the prover runs the RISC-V program. Because of this, the Spartan prover need only commit cryptographically to  $\tilde{z}$ , and in particular no party has to commit to  $\tilde{A}, \tilde{B}$ , or  $\tilde{C}$ . The constraint system has several hundred constraints per step of the RISC-V CPU. When Spartan is applied to this R1CS instance, the number of field operations performed by the prover is a small constant factor larger than the number of constraints (rows of the constraint matrices) plus the number of variables (columns of the constraint matrices). Since a field operation is at least an order of magnitude faster than a group operation, if an MSM-based polynomial commitment scheme is used, this implies that the Spartan prover time is dominated by the polynomial commitment costs summarized in Section 8.

**Memory checking.** Memory checking is handled by the memory-checking argument from Spice [SAGL18] sketched in Appendix B.3. Details specific to the memory model of RISC-V are discussed in Appendix A.2. The cost of the memory-checking argument are included in Section 8.

**Lookup argument.** The Lasso family of lookups is used to confirm that the relevant entries of  $z$  are in the relevant lookup tables. The remaining issue to address is that Sections 4.3-6 explained that the evaluation table of each individual RISC-V instruction is both MLE-structured and decomposable. But Lasso is a lookup argument for a single decomposable table (and Generalized-Lasso is a lookup argument for a single MLE-structured table). The following subsections explain how to bridge this gap.

### 7.1 The case of Generalized-Lasso

This gap is simple to bridge if using Generalized-Lasso rather than Lasso. This is because the concatenation of several MLE-structured tables is also MLE-structured. So we just apply Generalized-Lasso to the concatenation of the evaluation tables of every RISC-V instruction.

Indeed, suppose that the lookup table is the union of  $\ell$  different tables, where assume for simplicity that each table has size  $N$ . For  $i = 1, \dots, \ell$ , let  $T_i \in \mathbb{F}^N$  denote the vector representing table  $i$ , and let  $T \in \mathbb{F}^{\ell \cdot N}$  denote the concatenation of these vectors. Then viewing  $T$  as a function mapping  $\{0, 1\}^{\log \ell} \times \{0, 1\}^{\log N} \to \mathbb{F}$ , in the natural way, the following equation holds, with  $x \in \{0, 1\}^{\log \ell}$  and  $y \in \{0, 1\}^{\log N}$ :

$$\tilde{T}(x, y) = \sum_{k \in \{0, 1\}^{\log \ell}} \tilde{\text{EQ}}(k, x) \cdot \tilde{T}_{\text{int}(k)}(y), \quad (10)$$

where recall that  $\text{int}(k) = \sum_{i=1}^{\ell} 2^{i-1} \cdot k_i$  denotes the integer of which  $k$  is the binary representation. This is because the right hand side of Equation (10) is a multilinear polynomial in the variables of  $x$  and  $y$  and agrees with  $T$  at all inputs in  $\{0, 1\}^{\log \ell} \times \{0, 1\}^{\log N}$ . Hence, it is the unique multilinear polynomial extending  $T$ . Moreover, Equation (10) can be evaluated at any point  $(r_1, r_2) \in \mathbb{F}^{\log \ell} \times \mathbb{F}^{\log N}$  in time  $O(\log \ell)$  plus the amount of time required to evaluate each of  $T_1, \dots, T_\ell$  at  $r_2$ .

### 7.2 The case of Lasso

Addressing the gap discussed above is more involved if using Lasso. Closely related issues have been addressed in earlier work on zkVMs.

Specifically, the fact that the evaluation tables of different RISC-V instructions have different decompositions into subtables is analogous to the following issue dealt with in earlier approaches to front-end design for

zkVMs: different instructions are computed by different circuits. and while only one instruction is executed per step of the VM, in general it is not known until runtime which instruction will be executed at any given step. Very early front-ends for zkVMs such as TinyRAM dealt with this naively, by producing circuits that contained logic to execute *every possible instruction* for every step of the VM [BSCG<sup>+</sup>13a, BSCG<sup>+</sup>13b].

**A reordering approach.** vRAM [ZGK<sup>+</sup>18] proposed to avoid this overhead in a manner similar to the sorting-based memory-checking arguments sketched in Appendix B.2 (see also Arya [BCG<sup>+</sup>18] for related techniques). We sketch vRAM’s approach as an interactive argument, but it can be rendered non-interactive via the Fiat-Shamir transformation.

Specifically, after running the VM on the appropriate input, the prover tells the verifier how many times each of the primitive instructions was executed (if there are  $\ell$  primitive instructions, call these numbers  $k_1, \dots, k_\ell$ ), and commits to a reordering of the execution trace in which the entries are not sorted by timestep, but rather grouped by which instruction is executed at that step. That this second execution trace is indeed a reordering of the first is confirmed via the standard randomized permutation-checking procedure described in Appendix B.2 (Equation (11)). The instruction counts  $k_1, \dots, k_\ell$  unique specify a circuit  $\mathcal{C}$  that takes as input the reordered execution trace, and confirms that at each step the appropriate instruction was executed correctly. That is,  $\mathcal{C}$  contains circuitry executing instruction one  $k_1$  times, instruction two  $k_2$  times, and so on.

Any SNARK can then be applied to prove the the reordered execution trace indeed passes all of the checks computed within  $\mathcal{C}$ . Conceptually, this approach uses the prover’s knowledge (after running the program) of which instruction was executed at each step to eliminate the extraneous circuitry in earlier work (devoted to executing instructions that were not actually executed by the VM). See [ZGK<sup>+</sup>18] for further details.

An identical approach applies to the use of `Lasso` in Jolt. After the prover tells the verifier  $k_1, \dots, k_\ell$  and commits to a reordered execution trace grouped by executed instruction, `Lasso` is applied  $\ell$  different times, i.e., to the first  $k_1$  entries of the reordered execution trace using the evaluation table of the first instruction, to the second  $k_2$  entries of the reordered execution trace using the evaluation table of the second instruction, and so on. Via standard batching techniques [Set20], this does not increase the verification costs relative to a single invocation of `Lasso`.

**Avoiding reordering.** Cairo and other zkVM projects address the issue by including constraints that do capture all instructions, but using a SNARK targeted at uniform computation that ensures the prover’s cryptographic work do not grow with the number of constraints (i.e., the prover only cryptographically commits to the solution vector to the constraint system, whose length is independent of the number of constraints. Note, however, that the number of field operations performed by the prover does grow with the number of constraints). We can take an analogous approach with `Lasso`.

Conceptually, this approach expresses the concatenation of the evaluation tables of each instruction (and of which we have shown to be decomposable) as itself decomposable, analogous to how the concatenation of MLE-structured tables is itself MLE-structured (Equation (10)).

To this end, it is convenient to treat each instruction as leading to  $2c - 1$  different lookups into subtables ( $2c - 1$  here comes from the maximum number of subtable lookups across all instructions, namely due to SLTU as described in Section 5.3). For instructions that require fewer than  $2c - 1$  lookups into subtables, the extraneous lookup results can be set to 0, thereby avoiding any cryptographic work on the part of the prover if using an MSM-based commitment scheme. (we will explain below how to ensure that these extraneous subtable lookup results will be ignored by all subtables).

There will be a single collation polynomial  $g$  (Definition 2.6) for all instructions, but  $g$  will take as input not only the results of relevant subtable lookups, but also 8 additional variables that, when assigned values in  $\{0, 1\}$ , are interpreted as the bit-representation of the opcode. Denoting these variables as  $w = (w_1, \dots, w_8)$ , and letting  $g_i(z)$  denote the collation polynomial for the  $i$ ’th instruction, and letting  $x$  denote a vector of  $2c - 1$  variables, interpreted as specifying the results of  $2c - 1$  subtable lookups, we define

$$g(w, x) = \sum_{y \in \{0, 1\}^8} \widetilde{\mathsf{EQ}}(w, y) \cdot g_{\mathsf{int}(y)}(x).$$

This definition ensures that for any instruction  $i$ ,  $g(\text{bin}(i), x) = g_i(x)$ , i.e., collation for each instruction is performed correctly by  $g$ .

**Ensuring that subtable lookups get “routed” to the correct subtables.** As sketched in Appendix B.3, the core of **Lasso** is to invoke a grand product argument for each subtable (in order to compute the quantities given in Expressions (12) and (13) of Appendix B.3, to confirm they are equal). Applying a highly-optimized variant of the GKR protocol to a circuit computing this product [Tha13] yields a grand product argument in which the prover only performs field operations (the number of which is linear in the circuit size). Other related grand product arguments reduce the proof size at the cost of a low-order increase in commitment costs for the prover.

We can modify the circuit used for each subtable to take as input the bits of the opcode associated with each lookup. This way, the circuit can simply ignore any lookups associated with opcodes that do not access the subtable associated with the circuit. By ignore, we mean that the circuit sets to 1 the factor in the size- $m$  product within Expressions (12) and (13) that is associated with this particular lookup.

To minimize the size of this circuit, rather than having the prover commit to the bits of the opcode, it may be preferable to instead have the prover commit to some additional Boolean flags (beyond the 14 Boolean flags already described in Appendix A, so that each subtable’s circuit only needs to inspect a handful of Boolean flags to determine whether or not a given lookup operation actually is intended to access the subtable).

### 7.3 Pros and cons of using **Lasso** vs. **Generalized-Lasso** within **Jolt**

We estimate that using **Lasso** in **Jolt** reduces commitment costs for the prover by  $2 \times -3 \times$ , owing to **Generalized-Lasso**’s need for the prover to commit to  $c$  random field elements per lookup, where  $c$  is a parameter.<sup>21</sup> **Generalized-Lasso** has the prover commit to the same number of field elements as **Lasso**, but all of them are small, meaning in the set  $\{0, 1, \dots, m\}$  where  $m$  is the number of lookups.

However, a benefit of **Generalized-Lasso** is that it encapsulates inside of it all of the complexity regarding different instructions having different subtables. That is, for **Generalized-Lasso**, the prover and verifier can be implemented using only an oracle (i.e., function) that takes as input a point  $r \in \mathbb{F}^\ell$  where  $\ell$  is the logarithm of the evaluation table size, and evaluates the multilinear extension of each instruction’s evaluation table at a required point. This makes specifying the evaluation table of each instruction extremely simple. In contrast, with **Lasso**, the verifier needs to know how each evaluation table is decomposed into subtables, and how the results of lookups into subtables are collated into the result of the associated lookup into the “big” evaluation table.

One challenge here is that **Generalized-Lasso** involves an additional invocation of the sum-check protocol [LFKN90], and if the prover is only given an evaluation oracle for the multilinear extension of an instruction, it may require  $O(m \log N)$  oracle queries for  $m$  lookups into a table of size  $N$  [CMT12]. Since, for all the evaluation tables used in **Jolt**, each oracle query can be answered in  $O(\log N)$  field operations this translates to  $O(m \log^2 N)$  field operations total, and the  $\log^2 N$  factor may be large enough for this to bottleneck the prover. Fortunately, by leveraging more information about the lookup tables arising in **Jolt** than that their multilinear extensions can be evaluated in  $O(\log N)$  time, it is in fact possible to implement the sparse-dense sum-check prover in  $O(m \log N)$  or even  $O(cm)$  field operations (our companion paper [STW23] works through the details of this for several of the lookup tables arising in **Jolt**). These sum-check prover implementations are more complicated than the  $O(m \log^2 N)$ -time prover that only uses an evaluation oracle for the multilinear extensions. However, this does not affect auditability because only the **Jolt** verifier needs to be implemented correctly for the SNARK to be secure (and indeed, the verifier itself acts as an automatic auditor of the prover implementation).

In summary, while prover commitment costs are higher if **Jolt** is built using **Generalized-Lasso** as the lookup argument rather than **Lasso**, there are substantial auditability benefits to using **Generalized-Lasso** that may justify the performance price.

---

<sup>21</sup>Reasonable values of  $c$  are  $c = 3$  or  $c = 4$  for 32-bit data types, ensuring subtables of size  $2^{22}$  or  $2^{16}$  and  $c = 6$  or  $c = 8$  for 64-bit data types.

| Per-step Commitment Costs for Non-Memory Operations |                    |                            |                            |
|-----------------------------------------------------|--------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|
| Bit-length                                          | Number of Elements | In RV32<br>$W = 32, c = 3$ | In RV64<br>$W = 64, c = 6$ |
| 1                                                   | 22                 | 22                         | 22                         |
| [2, 12]                                             | $3 + 2c$           | 9                          | 15                         |
| $(2W/c) \approx 22$                                 | $1 + c$            | 4                          | 7                          |
| $\log(T)$                                           | $4 + 2c$           | 10                         | 16                         |
| $W$                                                 | 5                  | 5                          | 5                          |
| Total Elements                                      | $35 + 5c$          | 50                         | 65                         |
| In 256-bit equivalents:                             |                    | $\approx 5$ elements       | $\approx 6$ elements       |

Figure 3: An overview of the spread of elements committed to in Jolt in non-memory operations (i.e., excluding loads and stores which do not involve lookups) by their bit-length. The Lasso parameter  $c$  is 3 with RV32 ( $W = 32$ ) and  $c = 6$  with RV64 ( $W = 64$ ). We approximate the per-step commitments costs in terms of the cost of committing to a 256-bit element when using Pippenger’s MSM algorithm, assuming that the program code is under  $2^{22}$  bytes long, and the program finishes in under  $2^{30}$  CPU steps.
