

# Proving CPU Executions in Small Space

Vineet Nair<sup>1</sup> Justin Thaler<sup>2</sup> Michael Zhu<sup>3</sup>

## Abstract

zkVMs are SNARKs for verifying CPU execution. They allow an untrusted prover to show that it correctly ran a specified program on a witness, where the program is given as bytecode conforming to an instruction set architecture like RISC-V. Existing zkVMs still struggle with high prover resource costs, notably large runtime and memory usage. We show how to implement Jolt—an advanced, sum-check-based zkVM—with a significantly reduced memory footprint, *without* relying on SNARK recursion, and with only modest runtime overhead (potentially well below a factor of two). We discuss benefits of this approach compared to prevailing recursive techniques.

## 1 Introduction

Succinct Non-Interactive Arguments of Knowledge (SNARKs) enable an untrusted prover to convince a verifier that it possesses knowledge of a witness  $w$  satisfying a claimed property. Naively, one can always send  $w$  to the verifier, but a SNARK allows the prover to generate a short proof  $\pi$  that the verifier can check much more quickly than it could directly verify  $w$ .

A zkVM is a SNARK designed to prove that a certain CPU execution was carried out correctly on some input. The code to be executed is specified in bytecode (machine code), corresponding to a particular VM or instruction set architecture (ISA). Because the proof attests to the correctness of the underlying CPU execution, developers can write high-level programs that compile down to this ISA and still benefit from a succinct proof of correctness.

Although easy for developers to use, modern zkVMs impose large computational burdens on the prover, often requiring hundreds of thousands or even millions of times more work than directly running the program. Memory usage is also significant: proving just one million CPU cycles (which is trivial to run natively, taking less than a millisecond on a modern laptop) requires gigabytes of RAM, and proving a billion cycles requires terabytes. More generally, prover space scales linearly with the number of CPU cycles  $T$  being proven.

**Background on designing SNARKs and zkVMs.** At a high level, most SNARKs are designed by first designing a protocol known as a *polynomial IOP* (PIOP) and then designing a cryptographic protocol called a *polynomial commitment scheme* (PCS). Combining the two yields a succinct interactive argument, which can then be rendered non-interactive via the Fiat-Shamir transformation.

In zkVMs, the protocol typically begins with the prover committing to the VM’s *execution trace*: this is effectively a list of everything that happened at each cycle of the VM’s execution. The prover then applies a PIOP to prove that the committed execution trace is valid, meaning that it actually corresponds to the VM’s execution on a witness.

### 1.1 The Prevailing (Recursive) Approach to Controlling Prover Memory

A widely used strategy to manage the zkVM provers’ memory consumption is to *shard* the execution trace into smaller pieces (e.g., blocks of 1 million cycles) and prove each shard separately. These shard proofs are then combined using SNARK recursion or a “folding” procedure into a single, short proof. This approach allows the prover to store and prove only one or two shards at a time. In zkVM contexts, this approach is often called “continuations” or “recursive composition.”

---

<sup>1</sup>Arithmic

<sup>2</sup>a16z crypto research and Georgetown University

<sup>3</sup>a16z crypto research

This technique does indeed reduce memory usage in each shard proof, but it also introduces various downsides. Below, we give a brief overview of the main challenges.

#### 1.1.1 Verifier Implementation Complexity

Because each shard’s proof depends on a commitment to the VM state at that shard’s start, shards cannot be proved in complete isolation. The prover must ensure that the register and memory state at the end of shard  $i$  matches the state at the beginning of shard  $i + 1$ . Existing work provides ways to handle this matching efficiently [AS24, ST25], but it remains an additional layer of complexity.

Even more fundamentally, using recursion means that the proof statement is no longer just “I ran this program for  $T$  steps correctly.” Rather, it becomes “I hold multiple proofs (one per shard) that each shard was executed correctly from some committed state to the next.” This makes it more difficult for external parties to see that the *intended* statement is being proven. It increases the surface area for bugs, complicates formal verification efforts, and makes the entire system harder to audit.

#### 1.1.2 Security Considerations

SNARKs without recursion enjoy firmer theoretical underpinnings in certain idealized security models. For instance, unconditional security in the random oracle holds for some non-recursive SNARKs, but not for their recursive counterparts.<sup>4,5</sup> Furthermore, recursion typically requires taking a SNARK verifier, turning it into a circuit or constraint system, and then applying another SNARK to that circuit. These circuits are non-trivial to implement, particularly if one wants to keep their size small to mitigate performance bottlenecks. These circuits today are still often specified in extremely low-level domain-specific languages, a process that is error-prone, time-intensive, and difficult to verify for correctness.

Additionally, practical forms of recursion often rely on *algebraic* hash functions have seen less cryptanalysis than standard hash functions like SHA2 or SHA3.<sup>6</sup> Although ongoing efforts continue to strengthen confidence in these constructions, having the option to forgo recursion, and thus avoid the reliance on algebraic hashing altogether, remains appealing from both a security and implementation standpoint.

#### 1.1.3 Performance Overheads

A third limitation stems from the cost of recursion itself. With brute-force recursion, each shard’s proof is *verified* inside a larger SNARK, requiring the system to encode and prove a SNARK verifier circuit. Storing this verifier circuit already imposes nontrivial overhead on the prover in both time and memory.

There are approaches (especially using elliptic-curve-based commitments) that exploit homomorphisms to reduce some of this overhead. However, similar techniques for *hash-based* SNARKs remain costly in practice [BMNW24, KNS24, Sze24].

Another source of prover overhead in recursive approaches today is the issue raised in Section 1.1.1 of ensuring that the state of the VM’s memory at the end of shard  $i$  is equal to its state at the start of shard  $i + 1$ . Prominent projects currently pay large prover overheads to address this issue, with some using Merkle-hashing (causing the first read to each memory page in a given shard to cost over one thousand VM cycles<sup>7</sup>) and others resorting to collision-resistant multi-set hash functions whose evaluations involve elliptic curve group operations, many times more expensive than lightweight fingerprinting techniques that have long been used in non-recursive contexts [Gro24, RR25]. Although highly efficient methods are known for addressing this issue [AS24, BC24, ST25], these methods have not yet seen wide deployment.

<sup>4</sup>However, see Section 1.3.4 for additional discussion of idealized models and the (non-)implications of security therein.

<sup>5</sup>There have been some efforts to avoid heuristic security in folding-based recursion [LS24, EGS<sup>+</sup>24].

<sup>6</sup>Note this is not always the case. For example, if working over fields of characteristic two, very fast SNARKs are known for standard hash functions [DP23]. As another example, in folding schemes that use homomorphic commitments [KST22, KS24, BC23], hashing done in circuitry is a low-order cost, so using non-algebraic hash functions does not significantly alter prover time or space.

<sup>7</sup>See <https://dev.risczero.com/api/zkvm/optimization#paging>.

In summary, due to performance overheads arising from the use of SNARK recursion, it is possible that a non-recursive approach to controlling prover space ultimately leads to a faster or smaller space prover than recursive approaches. Our goal is to take a significant step toward making that possibility a reality (although realizing a high-performance implementation of our proving algorithms will still be a major engineering challenge).

#### 1.1.4 Large Shards Can Lead to Faster Proving

A final issue, especially pertinent to this work, is that some SNARKs benefit heavily from the ability to consider large shard sizes, notably larger than what is typically used in zkVMs today (roughly  $2^{20}$  CPU cycles). In particular, very recent work of Setty and Thaler introduces two highly efficient memory-checking arguments called *Twist* and *Shout* [ST25]. *Twist* applies to read/write memories and *Shout* to read-only memories.

In the context of continuations, let  $T$  denote the number of CPU cycles in a shard and  $K$  denote the size of the VM’s memory. The *Twist* and *Shout* provers (in the context of continuations) incur a number of field multiplications linear in the memory size  $K$ . To ensure that this does not become a bottleneck, the shard size should be comparable to (or larger than) the size of the CPU’s memory.

Thus, even if one is willing to use SNARK recursion, any zkVM that aims to support CPUs with, say, gigabytes of memory would benefit substantially from larger shard sizes—for example, on the order of  $2^{30}$  rather than  $2^{20}$  cycles. Existing zkVMs cannot handle this without requiring multiple terabytes of prover space.<sup>8</sup>

Moreover, certain commitment schemes that pair naturally with *Twist* and *Shout* have undesirable prover time bottlenecks when applied to small polynomials. For instance, when combining *Twist* and *Shout* with the Dory polynomial commitment scheme [Lee21], the prover performs a multi-pairing of size  $O(\sqrt{T})$  for each shard of size  $T$ , in addition to more standard operations (e.g., MSMs of size about  $T$ ). Because pairing evaluations are concretely expensive, the  $O(\sqrt{T})$ -sized multi-pairing can be a bottleneck when  $T$  is under about  $2^{24}$ , but is a low-order prover cost when  $T$  is large (see [ST25, Sections 2.9.1 and 9.2.3] for details). This means Dory will be slower than alternative commitment schemes if applied to small shards, but just as fast as other schemes if shards are large.

Consequently, *Twist* and *Shout* are likely to perform best when shard sizes can be significantly larger than those typically used today. Hence, even if recursion is used, an approach that also controls space directly can improve prover time by allowing larger shards without ballooning memory usage.

A related observation is that, even if recursion and small shards are used (e.g., shards of size  $T$  equal to roughly one million cycles or less, as is popular today), prover memory will be minimized if each shard is proven using our techniques (i.e, with space sublinear rather than linear in  $T$ ). Hence, our results will be useful in any context where prover space costs are paramount.

Summarizing all of the above, recursion-based sharding may not be the best approach to controlling prover memory usage. Instead, one can attempt to bound the prover’s space costs *directly*. This unlocks simpler verification procedures, stronger security guarantees, and the ability to choose larger shard sizes, skip sharding entirely, or minimize prover space even if small shards are used.

## 1.2 Non-Recursive Small-Space Techniques

Controlling prover memory in sum-check-based SNARKs without resorting to recursion is not new. Early implementations of the sum-check protocol already demonstrated how the prover can operate with small space by streaming the witness, often incurring only logarithmic overhead in runtime [CTY11, CMT12, BTW14]. As discussed above, this technique can also be used in conjunction with recursion to allow for larger shards.

---

<sup>8</sup>Ligeron [WHV24] is an exception, but it has a linear-time verifier, and is not based on the sum-check protocol (we believe that sum-check-based proof systems lead to the fastest possible provers).

Despite its promise, non-recursive sum-check-based techniques for reducing space have been underutilized in practice. We attribute this partly to the fact that sum-check-based SNARKs themselves have only relatively recently grown in popularity, as showcased by newer zkVMs such as Jolt [AST24], a zkVM that achieves state-of-the-art prover runtime and is built around the sum-check protocol.

A second reason may be that most memory-checking arguments require the prover to sort memory operations, and this sorting procedure is incompatible with small-space, non-recursive proving. However, memory-checking procedures that *avoid sorting* have long been known, and indeed Jolt uses such procedures.

A third potential reason is a belief that controlling prover space while avoiding recursion forces the prover to suffer a logarithmic-factor slowdown in runtime, as small-space implementations of the sum-check prover take time  $O(T \log T)$  instead of  $O(T)$  [CTY11, CMT12, BTW14].

In this paper, we show that a large concrete slowdown is not necessary, i.e., that Jolt can be adapted to run in small space without incurring a crippling time penalty—indeed, our estimates suggest a modest slowdown of well under a factor of 2, rather than the naive  $\log T$  factor that prior theoretical bounds imply (where in the zkVM context,  $T$  denotes the number of cycles in the VM execution that is being proved).

Note that we do not actually avoid an  $O(T \log T)$  prover runtime (at least, not if we want prover space to be  $T^{1-\Omega(1)}$ ). Hence, there is both a positive framing and a negative framing of our results. The positive framing is that we show the fastest known methods of implementing zkVM provers *already* are naturally small-space, and hence the prover can be made small-space “almost for free”. The negative framing is that zkVM proving is currently so slow (i.e., requiring just  $O(T)$  field operations to prove  $T$  cycles, but with an enormous constant hidden by the Big-Oh notation) that the prover time looks concretely more like  $O(T \log T)$  rather than  $O(T)$ . In other words, one can make zkVM provers small-space with minimal time hit only because the prover is so slow to begin with.

Both framings have merit. In Section 7.1, we estimate that the Jolt prover (with Twist and Shout, and combined with an appropriate elliptic-curve commitment scheme), when applied to RISC-V executions with a memory size of  $K = 2^{25}$ , incurs roughly  $900T$  field multiplications (900 field multiplications per VM cycle proved) when using space  $O(T)$ . Meanwhile, we estimate that a small-space implementation of the prover incurs about  $900T + 12T \log T$  field multiplications. The key point is that  $12T \log T$  is much less than  $900T$  for realistic values of  $T$ . In other words, quasilinear time with a small leading constant is faster than linear time proving with a large leading constant. See Section 1.3.3 for additional discussion.

**Two versions of Jolt: Spice+Lasso vs. Twist+Shout.** Currently, Jolt handles read/write memory by using a protocol called Spice [SAGL18] and manages read-only memory (such as instructions) via Lasso [STW24]. A new version, under active development and nearing completion, will replace Spice with Twist and Lasso with Shout [ST25]. Twist and Shout are memory-checking protocols that promise even faster proving than Spice and Lasso (as well as shorter proofs). In both versions of Jolt, the entire proof system is built on the sum-check protocol.

We describe how both versions of Jolt—(1) Spice+Lasso and (2) Twist+Shout—can be made small-space without recursion. Interestingly, the Twist+Shout version is simpler to adapt and comes with lower overheads, thanks to its more streamlined memory-checking logic. The reasons we discuss both versions in this work are: (1) the Spice+Lasso version is already implemented, while the Twist+Shout version is still in progress; (2) the Twist+Shout version performs best when combined with either an elliptic curve commitment scheme (e.g., Dory or HyperKZG), a lattice-based commitment with similar properties to curve-based ones [NS25], or a hashing-based commitment schemes over binary fields (e.g., Binius or Blaze). The Lasso+Spice version of Jolt may still prove useful for projects that, for whatever reason, seek to work with other commitment schemes that operate over other fields than the above; (3) Exciting progress in lattice-based folding schemes [NS25] involve polynomial commitments with expensive evaluation proofs. This may force the use of relatively small shard sizes within the folding scheme. Spice and Lasso may yet prove superior to Twist and Shout in this small-shard scenario.

**The “right” goal for space usage: logarithmic space is much lower than needed.** Many works seek SNARK provers that, when proving correct execution of a computer program running in space  $K$  and time  $T$ , use space  $O(K + \log T)$ . In fact, we achieve this time bound in this paper (for some choices of the polynomial commitment scheme).

However, we argue that far weaker space bounds are sufficient in practice. This is for two reasons. First, the values of  $K$  and  $T$  that arise in prominent SNARK applications (e.g., zkEVMs, which seek to prove statements of the form “I correctly processed this Ethereum block”) often have  $K \geq 2^{25}$  (corresponding to dozens of MBs of space used by the program execution) and  $T \leq 2^{35}$ .<sup>9</sup> This means that  $O(K + \log T)$  and  $O(K + T^{1/2})$  are the same in practice up to constant factors: both are dominated by the  $O(K)$  term. Second, depending on the hidden constant,  $O(K + T^{1/2})$  space (or even higher) can already improve dramatically upon the concrete space usage of existing recursive approaches to controlling the zkVM prover space. Indeed, today’s zkVMs require about 10 GB or more of prover space (at least if one is not willing to pay a substantial hit to prover time). Yet storing even  $T^{1/2}$  field elements for  $T = 2^{40}$  translates to just a few dozen MBs of prover space, orders of magnitude less than the roughly 10+ GBs used by recursion-based zkVMs today.

Although we achieve  $O(K + \log T)$  prover space, allowing for higher space bounds can lead to a much simpler and faster prover implementation. Let us give an illustrative example. Consider Jolt with Twist and Shout, and Dory [Lee21] as the polynomial commitment scheme. Because the Dory commitment key consists of random group elements (which, in practice, are generated by evaluating a cryptographic PRG at different inputs), the commitment key can be generated “on the fly”. But the Dory prover implementation is substantially simpler and *much* faster if the key is explicitly stored by the prover (see Section 1.3.1 for details).

When Dory is applied within Jolt using Twist and Shout, the commitment key consists of  $2\sqrt{KT}$  group elements. (By using a more complicated variation of Twist, the commitment key can be reduced in size to  $2\sqrt{K^{1/d} \cdot T}$  for any integer  $d > 1$ , but the Twist prover is fastest when  $d = 1$ ).

Consider  $K = 2^{25}$  and  $T = 2^{35}$  as a representative instance. Storing  $2\sqrt{KT}$  field elements costs about 100 GBs of space, which (while certainly much more space-intensive than desirable) is already acceptable in some settings. However, the size of the Dory commitment key can be lowered by a factor of 10 or more with a modest increase in verifier costs (see [ST25, Section 3.1.1] for details), and this would bring the commitment key size down to 10 GBs or less, which is roughly the amount of space used by recursion-based zkVMs today. Thus, we see that even  $O(\sqrt{KT})$  space can be acceptable for the prover in practice. That is, while  $O(T)$  space is too much, even modest improvements often suffice.

Another reason that a space bound of roughly  $O(\sqrt{T})$  space is an attractive target is that certain meaningful optimizations to sum-check proving run in this space bound [DT24] (these techniques can more generally achieve a space bound of  $T^{1/c}$  for any integer  $c \geq 1$ , but values of  $c$  larger than 2 lead to slower provers.)

**Why the Jolt prover slowdown is smaller than a  $\log T$  factor.** Although prior theoretical analyses of streaming sum-check [CMT12, CTY11, BTW14, BHR<sup>+</sup>20] suggest an  $O(T \log T)$  time bound for space-bounded provers and an  $O(T)$  bound for a memory-intensive ones, several factors substantially reduce the prover time blowup in Jolt, concretely to a factor of well below 2 (per our analytic estimates in Section 7.1).

1. **Sparse sums for most of the protocol.** In Jolt (and especially in its Twist+Shout variant), the sum-check protocol is applied several times to sums over a large number of terms—yet most of these terms are zero. The prover employs “sparse techniques” dating back to [CTY11, CMT12] to handle these zero-terms efficiently, and these same sparse-sum optimizations *also* allow for small-space operation without extra overhead during the early rounds of sum-check. Only in the final rounds of the protocol do the relevant sums become “dense”, and only then does the prover pay a time overhead for storing

---

<sup>9</sup>Today, a crude estimate for how many RISC-V cycles are required to prove a “heavy” Ethereum block is roughly  $2^{30}$ . However, there are proposals to scale the amount of processing performed within each block by an order of magnitude or more [But25].

fewer items in memory. Since those “dense” rounds comprise only a fraction of the prover total work, the resulting overall slowdown for the prover is considerably less than a full factor of  $\log T$ .

2. **Some sum-checks are directly compatible with a streaming prover.** For some of the sum-check invocations in Jolt, something even stronger holds: these sum-check instances are amenable to the so-called *sparse-dense sum-check* proving algorithm from [STW24, Appendix G]. This protocol is inherently streaming, meaning the prover naturally runs in small space and very few passes over the values being summed, with essentially no slowdown needed to achieve this.

In this work, we go a step further and describe a generalization of the sparse-dense sum-check protocol, which we call the *prefix-suffix inner product* protocol. This prover algorithm is a significant departure from that of [STW24, Appendix G], hewing much more closely to the standard linear-time sum-check prover algorithm [CTY11]. In a sense, the prefix-suffix inner product protocol identifies conditions under which the standard linear-time algorithm can actually be run in sublinear space.

Even for sum-check invocations where the sparse-dense sum-check protocol does apply, the new prefix-suffix inner product protocol is simpler and concretely faster. More importantly for us, the generality of this new protocol let us render the prover in several of Jolt’s sum-check invocations small space with no slowdown.

3. **“Small-value” sum-check is also directly compatible with a streaming prover.** We explain in Section 3.1.3 that certain techniques to speed up the Spartan prover as applied in Jolt (which leverage that all values arising in this Spartan instance are “small”) [BDT24] are *also* compatible with a streaming prover, with little to no time overhead.

To summarize the above three items, the fastest known ways of implementing the Jolt prover are already naturally space-controlled. For several sum-check invocations in Jolt, little to no overhead arises in making the prover small space. And for all of the others, time overheads arise only in late rounds of the protocol, and these rounds are only a small fraction of overall prover cost.

4. **Parallelism in repeated witness generation.** The small-space Jolt prover does have to generate the entire execution trace (the VM’s state at each step) many times. In Jolt, this so-called *witness generation* procedure currently accounts for under 5% of the total prover time when done once, so doing it even several dozen times is not necessarily prohibitive. Moreover, we can exploit multithreading to dramatically lower the cost of repeated witness generation. Concretely, the first time the witness is generated (which is often done serially today, since arbitrary computer programs may not be parallelizable), the prover can store a small number of *checkpoints*—snapshots of the VM state at fixed intervals. This ensures that the prover can regenerate each chunk of the trace in parallel when needed. With  $M$  threads, this can yield up to a factor- $M$  speedup compared to naively regenerating the witness from scratch in serial. This ensures repeated witness generation is only a modest additional cost for the prover.
5. **Stopping space-control early.** The space required by the standard linear-time sum-check proving algorithm [CTY11] halves in each round. Hence, after enough rounds have passed, the prover “switch” from a small-space prover implementation to the standard linear-time prover implementation, without increasing its space requirements. This saves a meaningful constant factor in prover time, while keeping the prover’s space bounded by a small polynomial in the number  $T$  of VM cycles proven, e.g.,  $T^{1/2}$ .
6. **No slowdown in committing or producing evaluation proofs.** With commitment schemes like Hyrax [WTS<sup>+</sup>18] and Dory [Lee21], if the prover is allowed space square root in the size of the committed polynomial, no slowdown whatsoever occurs compared to allowing a linear-space prover (see Section 6 for details).

**Overview of the techniques.** As discussed above, it’s well-known that sum-check proving can be done in small space if the prover is capable of streaming the terms being summed (i.e., of iteratively generating the terms one after the next). So the bulk of our effort lies simply showing in that the Jolt prover is indeed able to stream the terms being summed in all relevant sum-checks.

For Twist and Shout, this is immediate from inspection of the efficient proving algorithms given in the paper [ST25]. For Spartan’s application in Jolt, the main observation is simple: the primary sum-check invocation in Spartan requires the prover to stream the three vectors  $Az$ ,  $Bz$ , and  $Cz$ , where here  $z$  is a solution to the R1CS instance. In Jolt,  $z$  is essentially an execution trace of the VM, and  $A$ ,  $B$ , and  $C$  are essentially block-diagonal matrices (with constant-sized blocks, capturing under 100 constraints per CPU cycle).  $z$  can be streamed while executing the VM, and hence  $Az$ ,  $Bz$ , and  $Cz$  can be streamed as well, due to the block-diagonal structure of  $A$ ,  $B$ , and  $C$ . Intuitively, this simply means that every constraint in Jolt for cycle  $j$  of the VM’s execution involves only those variables of  $z$  captures only what happens at cycle  $j$ , and there are only constantly many such variables. For the grand products in Lasso and Spice, our main observation is that, while streaming over inputs to the grand product (which are simply random fingerprints of values and counts or timestamps arising in reads or writes to memory performed during the VM’s execution), the prover can also stream “partial products” of those inputs, via a depth-first traversal of the binary tree of multiplication gates computing those partial products.

For polynomial commitment schemes, we observe that for many polynomial commitment schemes the prover is directly implementable in space  $O(\sqrt{T})$  where  $T$  is the size of the polynomial being committed. Hence, no time overhead whatsoever is required to implement the prover in this space bound. If space as low as  $O(\log T)$  is desired, techniques from prior work [BHR<sup>+</sup>20] are easily adapted to a variety of polynomial commitments to achieve this while maintaining  $O(T \log T)$  prover time.

Our new prefix-suffix inner product protocol, like the sparse-dense sum-check protocol that it generalizes [STW24], is used to compute  $\sum_x u_x \cdot a_x$  where  $u_x$  is an arbitrary vector in  $\mathbb{F}^n$  and  $a_x$  is a “structured” vector in  $\mathbb{F}^n$ . The primary insight in our new protocol is a cleaner formulation of what structure in  $a_x$  is exploitable to ensure a small-space prover that runs in linear time.

**Key technical takeaways.** Summarizing the above discussion, our work draws three key conclusions. First, each component of the Jolt prover (Spartan, Twist, and Shout) is “almost” streaming already. At worst, the only modification needed to render the prover small-space arises in the final  $\log T$  rounds of the relevant sum-check instances, and simply invokes a small-space prover algorithm dating back to the first paper on linear-time and quasi-linear-time sum-check proving [CTY11]. Second, square-root rather than logarithmic prover space is often sufficient in practice, and is especially simple to achieve. In particular, many polynomial commitment schemes are directly implementable in space square root in the size of the committed polynomial. Third, asymptotic bounds on prover time do not necessarily match concrete bounds in practice. This is the case in our setting, where the  $O(T \log T)$  term in our prover’s runtime has a much smaller constant than the  $O(T)$  term (by nearly two orders of magnitude).

## 1.3 Additional discussion

### 1.3.1 The high cost of repeatedly generating commitment keys

When considering transparent elliptic curve commitment schemes, if we want the prover to use space less than  $O(T^{1/2})$ , the prover does not have the space to store the entire commitment key. Hence, it has to generate the key “online” one or more times. What is the time cost of this procedure?

In practice, generating a random group element typically involves evaluating a cryptographic PRG and then applying a hash-to-curve procedure [Ham13, BCPR16, WJSS23]. A PRG evaluation takes only several CPU cycles per output byte produced. However, hash-to-curve procedures often require thousands of CPU cycles per curve element produced, which is the same order of magnitude as the cost of several dozen field operations over a 256-bit field  $\mathbb{F}$ . In fact, the bottleneck in state-of-the-art hash-to-curve procedures [Ham13] is computing a square root within  $\mathbb{F}$ , which asymptotically costs  $O(\log |\mathbb{F}|) = O(\lambda)$  field operations.

This means that, with such commitment schemes, lowering the prover space to less than  $O(\sqrt{T})$  in Jolt (e.g., achieving logarithmic space) requires more than  $O(T \log T)$  field operations' worth of prover time. For example, when using (the simplest variation of) Hyrax [WTS<sup>+</sup>18] the prover's time becomes  $O(T\lambda + T \log T) = O(T\lambda)$ . When using commitment schemes like Dory [Lee21] that have logarithmic-round evaluation protocols, the prover has to generate elements of the commitment key  $O(T \log T)$  times (see Section 6 for further details), and this is equivalent to  $O(T \cdot \lambda \cdot \log T)$  field operations in total. Hence, repeatedly generating the commitment key to produce polynomial evaluation proofs is a significant prover time bottleneck. In practice, we do not believe this slowdown is worth the space savings. Instead, as we advocate for above, the prover should simply store the commitment key.

### 1.3.2 Committing to random values in Lasso and Spice

The grand product argument we use within Spice and Lasso is the one from Spartan/Quarks [Set20, SL20], which has the prover commit to  $T$  random values for grand products of size  $T$ . Using an elliptic curve commitment scheme, this requires  $O(T\lambda / \log(T))$  field operations where  $\lambda$  is the security parameter. For values of  $\lambda$  arising in practice (e.g.,  $\lambda = 128$ ), this is comparable to  $O(T \log T)$  time (though in practice committing to all these random values is a concrete prover bottleneck in Jolt when the Spartan/Quarks grand product is used rather than alternatives such as Thaler's grand product argument [Tha13] that are faster for the prover but have larger proofs). For simplicity, we state an asymptotic  $O(T \log T)$  runtime bound for the Lasso and Spice provers.

### 1.3.3 Is Jolt with Twist and Shout linear time?

With a commitment scheme such as Dory, the Jolt prover always devotes  $O(T)$  field operations to committing to data and producing evaluation proofs. The remaining components of Jolt are the various sum-check protocol instances in Spartan, Twist, and Shout. The linear-space prover implementations for Spartan and Shout run in  $O(T)$  time. The RISC-V VM has 32 registers, at most two of which are read and one written cycle. Since the number of registers is a constant, When Twist is applied to process these register reads and writes, the prover runs in  $O(T)$  time. The only component of linear-space Jolt proving that potentially requires superlinear time is Twist applied to the VM's reads and writes to RAM. In the worst case this takes time  $O(T \log K)$ . Unless the memory size  $K$  is modelled as a constant independent of  $T$ ,  $O(T \log K)$  is superlinear in  $T$ .<sup>10</sup>

However, there are two reasons why the Jolt prover's runtime can in fact be  $O(T)$  for "typical" program executions even when using Twist. First, the Twist prover only "pays" field operations for cycles that actually perform a read or write to RAM. Second, for memory accesses that are "*i*-local" (accessing memory cells that were previously accessed at most  $2^i$  cycles prior), the Twist prover only pays  $O(i)$  field operations. Accordingly, with Twist and Shout, the linear-space Jolt prover performs  $\Theta(T \log K)$  field operations only when a constant fraction of cycles perform reads or writes to RAM *and* those memory operations are not sufficiently local.

In summary, the prover for Jolt with Twist and Shout can be considered linear-time for many program executions. And since the runtime of our  $O(\sqrt{KT})$ -space proving algorithm is concretely within a small constant factor of the linear-space prover's time, the small-space prover's runtime concretely behaves in a similar fashion, even though it is asymptotically  $O(T \log T)$ .

### 1.3.4 Attacks on the Fiat-Shamir transformation

Recently, attacks have been demonstrated [KRS25] on proof systems that combine the GKR protocol [GKR15, CMT12, Tha13] (plus any multilinear polynomial commitment scheme) with the Fiat-Shamir transformation [FS87]. Let us refer to the attackable protocol as FS-GKR. Currently, these attacks are only known to work

<sup>10</sup>If using Spice with GKR-based grand products [Tha13] in place of Twist, the Jolt prover's runtime is  $O(T)$  field operations in the worst case, regardless of the memory size  $K$ . But Spice is concretely slower for the prover than Twist [ST25], and moreover this variant of Spice also leads to bigger proofs (of size  $O(\log^2 T)$ ) than with Twist.

when FS-GKR is applied to a specific class of circuits, key components of which must be deterministic (i.e., they must take no “untrusted advice”). This causes the circuits to be large and deep. From a performance standpoint, this is precisely the class of circuits for which the GKR protocol is *unattractive*, as it translates to large proofs and a slow prover.

Despite these caveats, the attacks raise concerns about the viability of the Fiat-Shamir paradigm in general (i.e., of designing SNARKs by first designing a public-coin interactive protocol, and then removing interaction via the Fiat-Shamir transformation). The aforementioned attacks on FS-GKR apply even though the protocol is *unconditionally secure in the random oracle model*, due to the difference between the random oracle idealization and actual hash functions. Understanding and mitigating such attacks (possibly by altering the FS-transformation itself [AY25]) remains an extremely important and active area of research.

Arguably, the circuits for which FS-GKR has been shown to be attackable are reminiscent of those used in recursive proving. By this, we mean that the circuit, to “make itself attackable” when FS-GKR is applied to it, performs the same computation that FS-GKR verifier does.<sup>11</sup> This offers further motivation for our work, as we focus on controlling prover memory usage *without* resorting to SNARK recursion.

Given the above attacks, it is worth clarifying the role of the GKR protocol within Jolt. The GKR protocol is used in Jolt-with-Spice-and-Lasso, but it is only applied to “grand product circuits” that are vastly simpler than those known to be attackable. Jolt-with-Twist-and-Shout does not invoke the GKR protocol at all.

## 1.4 Related Work

Cormode, Thaler, and Yi (CTY) [CTY11] gave two different algorithms for implementing the sum-check prover when the sum-check protocol is applied to a product of  $\log(T)$ -variate multilinear polynomials. One performs  $O(T)$  field multiplications but requires space  $O(T)$ . We call this the *standard linear-time sum-check proving algorithm*. The other proving algorithm in CTY performs  $O(m \log T)$ , where  $m$  is the number of terms of the sum that are non-zero—we refer to  $m$  as the *sparsity* of the sum, and refer to this proving algorithm as the *sparse proving algorithm*. The  $O(m \log T)$  time bound arises because the prover spends time  $O(m)$  in *each* of the  $O(\log T)$  rounds (whereas in the standard linear-time proving algorithm, the prover’s time in round  $i$  is  $O(T/2^i)$ ).

The sparse proving algorithm requires just  $O(\log T)$  space if the prover has streaming access to the terms of the sum (i.e., if the prover can generate one term after the next in small space). We distill the sparse proving algorithm for the sum-check protocol in Section 3.1.

Somewhat confusingly, the work of CTY was framed around the notion of “streaming interactive proofs”, where streaming here refers to the *verifier* processing the input in a streaming fashion. An unrelated (but historically more important) contribution of the same work was to describe the sparse sum-check prover algorithm (which is small-space for the prover if the prover is capable of generating the terms being summed in a streaming fashion). Thus, CTY achieved a “streaming verifier” *and* (in a different sense) also implicitly achieved a “streaming prover” for the sum-check protocol.

The sparse sum-check prover algorithm was subsequently applied [CMT12] to achieve a quasilinear-time prover for circuit evaluation (later improved to linear time via a series of works [Tha13, WJB<sup>+</sup>17, XZZ<sup>+</sup>19, Set20]), and in [BTW14] to explicitly achieve a small-space, quasilinear time proving algorithm for circuit satisfiability. [BTW14] was presented as a two-prover interactive proof, but from a modern perspective it implicitly gives a polynomial IOP (PIOP), as the second prover in the two-prover proof system plays the same role as a polynomial commitment scheme.

[BHR<sup>+</sup>20] construct a SNARK for virtual machines (VMs) with provers operating in quasilinear time and small space (linear in the space usage of the VM itself, plus a term that is logarithmic in the VM’s runtime). They work in the random oracle model, assuming the hardness of the discrete logarithm problem in prime-order groups. A key technical contribution is to identify a “streaming-prover” implementation of the Bulletproofs/IPA polynomial commitment scheme [BCC<sup>+</sup>16, BBB<sup>+</sup>18] to combine with the small-space PIOP of Blumberg et al. [BTW14].

<sup>11</sup>Though unlike actual recursion circuits, the circuit for which FS-GKR is attackable also has to deterministically compute a cryptographic commitment to the witness that it is fed.

A downside of the Bulletproofs PCS is that it requires (super-)linear time verification. [BHR<sup>+</sup>21] improve the verifier in [BHR<sup>+</sup>20] by leveraging the PCS from [BFS20], which features a sublinear verifier algorithm for the evaluation protocol. They further devise a small-space commitment algorithm and a small-space evaluation prover algorithm for the PCS in [BFS20]. This allows them to retain the PIOP from [BHR<sup>+</sup>20, BTW14] while replacing its PCS with the one from [BFS20], achieving sublinear verifier complexity.

Gemini [BCHO22] reestablishes the result of Block et al. [BHR<sup>+</sup>20] regarding small-space, quasilinear-time proving for VM execution, though with a multilinear analog of the KZG PCS [KZG10] in place of the Bulletproofs/IPA PCS. As with KZG commitments themselves, the structured reference string for this PCS is of linear size, so the prover is only small space if this SRS can be “streamed” by the prover. Gemini more generally gives SNARKs for rank-one constraint systems where the prover may make many streaming passes over the witness and associated constraint evaluations.

Ligatron [WHV24] is a SNARK (*not* based on the sum-check protocol) for WASM execution, where the prover runs in quasilinear time and space square root of the number of gates in a circuit required to implement the WASM execution. The proof size is also square root in the number of gates. Ligatron involves a linear-time verifier.

Epistle [ZCL<sup>+</sup>24] introduces SNARKs with a small-space prover tailored for Plonkish constraint systems. As part of this work, they design SNARK for grand products, which verifies that the product of all elements in a committed vector equals 1. Their prover operates within a small-space regime, but their approach differs from ours as it does not rely on the sum-check protocol. Their technique constructs two vectors containing the partial products of the witness vector, where one vector is a cyclic shift of the other, and the final component of one vector encodes the product value. They then employ protocols to verify the cyclic relationship between these vectors, along with polynomial identities that enforce the correctness of the partial product computations. This method introduces higher overheads than our approach in Section D.

Sparrow [PP24] presents a SNARK tailored to data-parallel circuits. In FFT-friendly fields, their approach reduces the prover’s space complexity to approximately the square root of the circuit’s size, while the prover’s runtime is superlinear by only a doubly-logarithmic factor. The main technique in [PP24] is as follows. Consider the sum-check protocol applied to a product of two multilinear polynomials over  $\log T$  variables. By increasing the degree of both polynomials in their first two variables from one to, respectively,  $\log T$  and  $\sqrt{T}/\log T$ , the sparse sum-check prover winds up spending slightly superlinear time in the first two rounds but very little time in subsequent rounds. Moreover, the prover’s space stays bounded by roughly  $O(\sqrt{T})$ .

In Scribe, [BMM<sup>+</sup>24] consider SNARKs for circuit satisfiability. They allow the prover to use linear space in the size  $T$  of the circuit, but limit the prover’s access to this large memory to read/write streaming passes. This means that the prover can repeatedly read and overwrite the entire memory from start to finish. They adapt the sum-check-based Hyperplonk PIOP [CBBZ23] to this setting, as well as several polynomial commitment schemes. Our work focuses on zkVMs rather than circuit-satisfiability (effectively, we focus on a specific “circuit” that captures execution of the RISC-V VM). In this context, we avoid linear space for the prover.

Throughout Scribe [BMM<sup>+</sup>24], the authors describe various “barriers to read-only streaming”. A brief description of these issues and how they relate to our work is warranted. First, several of the barriers amount to characterizing  $O(T \log T)$ -time prover algorithms as too slow. But, as discussed in Section 1.2 above and Section 7.1 below, for zkVMs (a setting not considered in Scribe),  $O(T \log T)$ -time prover algorithms can be within a small constant factor (potentially well below  $2\times$ ) slower than state-of-the-art linear-space proving algorithms. Scribe also describes various issues arising with a depth-first traversal of a binary tree of multiplication gates in grand product arguments (see [BMM<sup>+</sup>24, Remark 2.7] and [BMM<sup>+</sup>24, Section 2.8.1]). Our result about making grand products streaming for the prover (Appendix D) uses exactly this approach, showing that there is no fundamental issue with a depth-first traversal order, at least not if  $O(T \log T)$  prover runtime is acceptable.<sup>12</sup>

<sup>12</sup>Scribe also describes concerns related to achieving a fast streaming prover for polynomial commitment schemes exploiting vector-